## aleph
Modular ALEPH programming language v2.4

Aleph is a historical programming language; its name is an abbreviation for
**A** **L**anguage **E**ncouraging **P**rogram **H**iearachy.
This is an Aleph complier written in Aleph. The language is described
in the [Aleph Manual](https://lcsirmaz.github.io/aleph/manual.html);
while the implemented Aleph language is discussed in
[Aleph Compiler 2.4](https://lcsirmaz.github.io/aleph/alephcomp.html).
Try out the language features in the interactive
[Aleph PlayGround](https://lcsirmaz.github.io/aleph/),
where you can edit, compile and run ALEPH code immediately.

## Aleph Playground

The [PlayGround](https://lcsirmaz.github.io/aleph/) is a command-line based 
online tool for creating, editing, compiling and running ALEPH programs.
Commands are entered at the bottom line of the workplace. Above the command
line is the console window where the entered commands as well as messages
sent to the `stdout` channel appear. The top window is reserved for running
time error messages and for the `stderr` channel. For a quick start enter

    -start

(with a dash) at the bottom line. Commands for the impatient are

| command | description |
| :----    | :---- |
| `help`     | give a general help |
| `load a1`  | load the sample ALEPH program `a1.ale` (Hello World!) |
| edit a1.ale | open this program in an editing window |
| compile a1.ale | compile it |
| run a1  | and run it (assuming compiled without errors) |

Some other basic commands:

| command | description |
| :---- | :---- |
| mkpr, chpr | create a new project; change to the specified project |
| load a1, ... load a20 | load one of the sample ALEPH programs |
| edit, view | open a character file for editing and viewing |
| stdlib |     show the standard ALEPH library |
| dir, ls | list files |
| cp, rm | copy, remove (delete) files |
| compile | compile and link an ALEPH program with modules |
| run | run a compiled ALEPH program |


## Source files

The ALEPH compiler, optimizer and linker are written in Modular ALEPH itself.
Files with extension `.ale` are Aleph source files. The compiler produces
an intermediate ALICE code. The intermediate code is optimized, and then 
linked either to C (which can be compiled by a C compiler), or to javascript
(to be run directly by a javascript engine, e.g., in a browser).

* [comp](comp) Aleph compiler modules (aleph code)
* [opt](opt) Module optimizer (aleph code)
* [link](link) Linker producing C target (aleph code)
* [jslink](jslink) Linker producing javascript target (aleph code)
* [stdlib](stdlib) Standard Aleph library for the compiler (aleph code)
* [stdC](stdC) Aleph library files for the C linker (aleph code)
* [stdjs](stdjs) Aleph library files for the javascript linker (aleph code)
* [sample](sample) Some sample aleph programs
* [doc](doc) Aleph Manual and implementation details

### Target specific files

* [C](C) The C code of the compiler, optimizer and both linkers as generated by the Aleph &xrarr; C compiler
* [coreC](coreC) C running environment (programs and headers)
* [corejs](corejs) javascript running environment
* [joe](joe) Joe syntax highlighter for Aleph programs with .ale extension

## Compiling the Aleph &xrarr; C compiler

Compile the `acomp.c`, `aopt.c` and `alink.c` files in the [C](C) directory:

    gcc -W -O3 -I ../coreC -o acomp acomp.c ../coreC/*.c
    gcc -W -O3 -I ../coreC -o aopt  aopt.c ../coreC/*.c
    gcc -W -O3 -I ../coreC -o alink alink.c ../coreC/*.c
   
## Compiling, linking and running aleph files using C target

`acomp` produces intermediate `.ice` files from Aleph source.
`aopt` performs some optimization on these `.ice` files.
Linking is done by `alink` which generates a C source code.
The additional header and C files needed to compile the generated C program
are in the directory 'coreC`.

Directory containing standard library files can be specified after the `-L`
argument; these are `stdlib` and `stdC` for the compiler and the linker,
respectively. The following commands, given in the main directory, compile, link,
and run the `ex2.ale` sample program from the [sample](sample) directory.

    C/acomp -L stdlib sample/ex2  # generate ex2.ice
    C/aopt  ex2                   # optimize ex2.ice
    C/alink -L stdC ex2           # generate ex2.c
    gcc -I coreC -o ex2 ex2.c coreC/*.c # compile the C source
    ./ex2                         # and run it

